With Frank W.R. Hubert, he was more of a person who
worked behind the scenes. I'm really not sure if I
ever heard him give a speech, but everyone seemed
to know him. And he was, if you want to call it
glad-handing, you know, he was right there and
everybody was coming to him and he was going to
various people. And with every one of these
people, he was always introducing me. He was
saying, this is Dr. Glenn Johnson. He's one of our
new faculty members from Columbia University.
And we like what he's doing, et cetera, et cetera.
And they would then start asking me questions. And
they were just as inquisitive as the faculty had
been when I first came down there on that
interview. about this non-graded school and the
lander's interaction analysis and what Jerry and
I were doing with this block program. They were all
interested in that. Now that block program, Jerry
and I had nothing to do with the formulation of
that. That was strictly Paul Hensarling, Bill
Graves, and his counterpart at the secondary
level. They had laid all the groundwork for that
the previous year. And as I recall, the second or
third year, that was operational. They started to
get some... nice recognition even at the national
level for that that program that block program so
they get all the accolades for that and i may have
mentioned this already but one of the other
blessings was having earl rutter with real public
education experience out in the schools and frank
hubert the same and both of them having a lot of
experience in the real world of Austin
bureaucracy and politics. That's right. Rudder
in the Land Office and Hubert in the Department of
Education, and they both knew their way around the
legislature and other. Did you all have any
interaction in those early years with the
Coordinating Board? Yes. Anytime we had a change
in our degree program, we had to go over and make
presentations. They were brief, but there were
more inquiries, you know, why this, why that, and
getting clarification.
You mentioned something just a second ago. Can we
back that up? I want to hear it.
Yes, hearing that replay, it finally registered
with me while you were talking. Another thing that
surprised me and tuned me in to just how
politically oriented or connected Earl Rudder
and Frank W.R. Hubert were, I remember sitting in
his office one day And he picks up the phone and
carries on a conversation with Congressman Tiger
Teague in Washington, DC, which really impressed
me that somebody could do that, pick up the phone
and talk to a congressman with the power that Tiger
Teague had because he was a very powerful
congressman and a real spokesperson for Veteran
Affairs and so forth. That was very impressive.
And I said we made presentations to the
Coordinating Board. make presentations to the
coordinating board. Our presentations were with
J.W. Edgar's group, but the coordinating board,
it seems to me we were in the background and there to
answer questions, but it was always the vice
president or later the provost who really went to
the coordinating board and made presentations. I
don't think we ever made, I don't recall now in
retrospect ever making a presentation to the
coordinating board. Did you or your colleagues
work with commissioner jack kenny williams who
headed the coordinating board at that time did
y'all work with him no he had left by the time i came
in 67 but i'm sure somebody like maybe don barker or
somebody like that may have been here long enough
to right in those earliest years what were your
personal goals You must have set some goals for
yourself. Yes, I really wanted to become the best I
could become and move up the academic rank to
associate and full professor, establish some
research efforts, and to write. I enjoyed
writing. I had already written. In fact, when you
brought that up, when I came down for the
interview, the faculty were were very impressed
that I already had publications in national
refereed journals. I wasn't even in the college or
university setting, and yet I'd already
published in pretty prestigious academic
journals. And I always enjoyed writing. Even my
first year of teaching, I was writing articles
that would appear in the newspapers. And I was
setting up activities where my students would
become involved. And newspaper photographers
would come in and photograph. And we'd have a
little caption story to go with it. And I continued
that kind of writing when I was working on my
master's degree, my doctorate. that type of
writing plus writing for academic journals. And
when I became principal down at Clayton,
Missouri, they asked me to assume responsibility
for the Clayton School News. So I assumed that
responsibility and would have usually an article
in each monthly news that came out. I'd write
something specifically. So I always enjoyed the
writing. In your first years here, did you have a
favorite research topic? I didn't have time to
really write that first year. I think the newness,
the five-course load, the pulling together of
this new block program that Paul and Bill Graves
wanted us to. to establish just devoured almost
all of my time. So I don't think I had time to really
do research or write that first year. Of course, we
were putting together proposals,
too, new courses. We were trying to get new courses
generated. That was time consuming. Now there
must have been some good stories that you can
recall about you as a non-Texan beginning to have
Aggie students in your classes. There must have
been some learning experiences you can share.
Actually, I was pretty much impressed with the
Aggie students.
That first year, I doubt if I had more than two or
three young men in the courses. They were all
ladies. And they just seemed like very clean cut
kids. A lot of times, people would be out maybe a
year. and want to become a teacher and they'd have
to come in and take our courses and they seemed
mature so I really didn't have any great unusual
stories I just liked these people I thought they
were really really good people and interested in
doing what they could to improve education. Did
you have any encounters with Aggie traditions in
those first years? Oh yes, and very impressive. I
mean starting with, and I took in all of them that
first year. They would talk about silver taps. I
wanted to see silver taps, so I saw silver taps.
Muster, I wanted to see what this was. I was very
impressed. Bonfire, that first ball before the
University of Texas game, a game in which we won and
surprised everyone. It was the year where Gene
Stallings won the Southwest Conference, and we'd
lost the first four games. So nobody was expecting
this to happen, but... All the tradition and so
forth was extremely impressive. The Corps of
Cadets was impressive.
The march-ins to the football games, I had to go
over and see that. Those were all impressive to me.
Do you remember any instances of Aggie good bull or
pranks in or around any of your classes didn't run
into that in any of my classes but the very first
yell practice i went with bowled me over because
all these good kids and nice kids and so forth
suddenly took on a whole different complexion
that midnight yell practice and They were using
the language that even turned my face red. And I
kind of had a few comments with my colleagues after
that. When I'd been to my first Yale practice, I
didn't appreciate the language that was being
used. I liked the enthusiasm and so forth, but the
off-color stories that the Yale healers were
using just seemed totally out of place with what
I'd seen up to that point. What was your evaluation
of the quality of A&M students? I thought they were
good students. Now, they were not what you would
call Ivy League type or Ohio State type students. I
had done a master's at Ohio State, so I was
surrounded by that. But they were comparable to
what maybe I saw at Kent State. I would say they were
comparable to that type of student. In those early
years, did they seem, could you categorize them by
being urban or rural? You said there were more
women than men. Yes. Were they small town? I think
they were predominantly small town. We were
beginning to draw pretty heavily out of the
Houston area at that time. We were beginning to get
some trickle from the Dallas area, which
eventually grew. As I said, everything seemed to
double from year to year. More and more of the urban
types came in. You saw I saw a change in the wealth
among the students. My first year there, you
seldom saw anything in the classification of a
Cadillac or a Porsche or anything like that. But
that started to change rather rapidly. Pretty
soon, these kids were driving cars that I
certainly couldn't afford to drive. And that was a
big change. So the urban influx and the wealth It
seemed to change. All right, let's go back now
chronologically.
The College of Education is created in the late
60s. 69, opened in 69. All right, and Dean Hubert
becomes the dean. And then what was your
responsibility at that point? Okay, now this was
kind of unique, and this really shows the
administrative skills of Frank W.R. Hubert. Once
Rudder and he knew that that college was going to be
formed and going to open their doors in 1969, the
fall, the previous academic years, Frank already
identified who his department heads were going to
be. He was going to keep Carl Landis, who was head of
the Department of Health and Physical Education.
That department was in the College of Liberal
Arts. It would come into the new College of
Education. the head of the Department of
Industrial Education opted to stay in
engineering. So James Boone became the
designated department head one year from then.
And that department would come out of engineering
into the new College of Education. The old
Department of Education would become three
departments. Ed Administration and Les
Richardson was tapped to head that up.
Educational Curriculum and Instruction was
called Curriculum and Instruction to begin with.
And Frank asked me to head that up. So this was my
second year here, and he's already asked me to be
head of a department. And Art Roach was already
here, and he would head up the new Department of
Educational Psychology. So the old Department of
Education would disappear, and these three new
departments would emerge, Ed Psych, Ed
Administration, Curriculum, and Instruction.
But Frank Hubert had his five department heads
identified. We met with him. It seemed like a
weekly basis. I'm sure it wasn't every week, but he
was training us to become these three new
department heads. Carl Landis had the
experience. Jim Boone needed that kind of
training, just like the three new department
heads would have to have. We went through budget.
We went through personnel selection. We hired
personnel. We kept records, and none of this, you
understand, was ever going to go anywhere because
you couldn't process Form 500s to hire people
under curriculum and instruction. It was still
the Department of Education. Frank wore two hats.
He remained dean of the College of, was it Arts and
Sciences or Liberal Arts by then? I don't know. I
don't know. Originally it was arts and sciences,
and I don't know whether there was a split into
liberal arts. It may have split and become liberal
arts by then, but he remained dean of that college
and head of the Department of Education.
Paul was stepped down, and Frank became the new
department. So Frank was wearing two hats. Half a
day, he'd be up in the dean's office. The other half
day, he'd be down in the Department of Education
working with all these new 2B department heads and
trying to get the department organized for the
changeover. And I thought his foresight on that
was just excellent. Because boy, were those five
department heads ready when that door opened the
following fall time. Based on that preparation
that he gave y'all, what do you think he thought
were the keys to good leadership?
And I kind of had this impression as I got
acquainted with and watched Dean Benson function
over in engineering. It seemed to me that Hubert
and Benson had a similar kind of administrative
style. They delegated. And Frank Hubert kept
saying over and over to us, as prospect of new
department heads all that previous year, you're
going to assume responsibility for this. You will
make the decisions. And he kept punching that
home. And as I watched Benson operate over in
engineering, it seemed like he was operating that
way too. When he appointed somebody a department
head, they ran the department. And I think he and
Frank Hubert thought philosophically, if you
can't cut it, we'll get somebody else as the
department head. But as long as you're in the
department, you're going to run it. And even if I'm
going to replace you, you're still going to run
until I replace you, you know, type of thing. And I
like that because I came out, coming out of the
administration, head administration training
at Columbia University. That was the philosophy
there. That as an administrator, you surrounded
yourself with people who could assume
responsibility and you turned them loose and gave
them support. And I always felt that way with
Hubert, that I had the freedom to do and that he
would support me. Even if he didn't like it, I think
he would still support me.
I think that was his philosophy.
How much was... He a detailed person about dollars
and cents. Oh, tremendous. He really understood
the financial side of any organization. And when
we opened our doors in the fall of 69, we were pretty
solid. And I never felt threatened. One of the
things that I learned coming out of Columbia
University's head administration training
program was that two things will get you into big
trouble very quickly. And that's personnel
problems and money. And so I appreciated Hubert's
philosophy, which followed that. You better have
good personnel morally, ethically, and you
better watch your money. Even the money that he
would be allocating to the departments, he made it
very clear that it was going to be determined on how
much student credit hour you could generate. that
he believed in the formula that Jack Kenny
Williams had established when he was
Commissioner of Education. Jack Kenny Williams
put that into operation, the student credit hour
formula to finance universities and colleges,
and Hubert simply carried it the next step, which
was, okay, In this college, you're going to
function that way. You have to generate student
credit hours and allocate funding. Pretty much
now there were exceptions, of course. He knew when
somebody was getting a new program started, they
would need a little extra boost here and there.
When you became department head, do you remember
who the faculty was, who were the faculty members
in this new department? Yes, well some of the key
players by that time, I had hired Bob Schuetz, who
would later become head of the department. Five
years later, I for personal reasons, went up to
Hubert and said, I've got a daughter. We don't know
what's wrong with her. She's having problems. I'm
feeling stressed. And I really, if you would be
well, I'd really like to step out of this job. And
Frank's response was almost immediate. He said,
we're going to do whatever you want to do. And I
said, I want to do that. And he said, well, You know,
I've got a new idea, and that is we've got some
isolated higher education courses. One over here
in industrial, and one over here in ed psych.
There's one in your department and a couple in Ed's
administration. He said, I'd like to see those
pulled together. If you're going to step down,
would you step in as kind of a coordinator of that
effort? It's not going to be demanding like the
department head's job, but would you do that? And I
said, yes. And he said, now, second question. This
shows how quick his mind works. This was out of a
clear blue sky. I went up there and made this
pronouncement to him that I really wanted to step
down. His next question was, who would be the
department head of curriculum and instruction?
And I didn't hesitate to either. I said, I know the
faculty would support Bob Schutz. So Bob had been
one of the first hires that I made because I needed a
really strong secondary education. Harold was
the guy I was trying to recall. He was Bill Graves'
counterpart. And he had left or was leaving, I
forget which. So I needed someone now who could
really head up secondary education. The college
had, or Dean Hubert had interviewed Bob Schutz for
a research position, assistant dean for
research, and he didn't have those
qualifications. But the credentials that I saw
were overwhelming. What a find this would be in
secondary education. He'd been sort of a
coordinator of curriculum for secondary ed at one
of the California schools. He was co-author of a
whole English textbook series for secondary
schools. So the offer coming out of the dean's
office to Bob was not for assistant dean for
research, but would you be interested in coming in
and taking over the secondary education program
in EDCI where Johnson's head of the department.
And Bob agreed to come in as my head of secondary
education. Two other key people that I hired was
David David, David dummy and David had that Bob's
credentials. at the elementary level. He had been
a very successful elementary person in the St.
Louis County area. And I was very impressed with
his credentials, a graduate of the University of
Missouri. Bob Shutes was a graduate of Harvard.
And those were the kind of people I was looking for.
So I brought David in to head up elementary
education. And one thing that had bothered me
immensely from really the first semester I was at
Texas A&M was the mishandling of a whole area
called history and philosophy of education. They
were having graduate students teach this who knew
absolutely nothing about the history of
education or the philosophy of education, they
would be assigned a senior level history and
philosophy course to teach. And they'd be given a
textbook. And they'd say, read this book and be
prepared to start classes Monday. And that just
didn't settle with me. Because if you knew
anything about the history and philosophy
program at Columbia University. Those were
dynamic
people. They were nationally and
internationally recognized people like Phil
Phoenix, just a giant in the field. So I wanted
someone who had the right background. And when I
was up in Chicago, at one of the national meetings,
I put out the word that I wanted someone in history,
philosophy, and that's when I found Jack
Campbell. Jack had a bachelor's degree in
history. He had been through the history and
philosophical foundations program at Columbia
University. He had been head of a department. in
one of the New York University System schools. He
had gone out to a Pennsylvania school where he was a
department head and I brought Jack in and Jack
really did understand and know everything and was
writing in that whole field so I felt a lot more
comfortable with people like Bob Schutz, David W.
David, and Jack Campbell coming in with those
kinds of credentials, I felt comfortable with
what they were doing. Did the doctoral program
begin during those years? Yes. When the new
college was formed, this was another thing that
surprised all of us. Whoever made the
presentation to the coordinating board, it may
have been Frank Hubert, it may have been one of the
vice presidents, but whoever, it may have been
some political things behind the scenes, but
whoever did it, did it right because they approved
right off the bat PhD programs in all five
departments and EDD programs.
I think industrial education only had an EdD
program, as I recall, and yet coordinating board
approved EDD and PhD programs for all five
departments. That immediately attracted
students and our growth was immense. I think that
first year, by the end of the first year in
curriculum and instruction, we had Something
like 300 master's degree students and pretty
close to 90 doctoral students. Do you remember
when the first doctoral degree was completed in
the department? In the department? No. Were you
department head? Was it in that five years? Yes, it
was. And I think it...
It could have been Jeannie Anderson. I just have to
go back and look. But she was working on the PhD in
Elm primarily. although it was called curriculum
and instruction, her area of concentration was
really elementary education and reading. And the
reason I think she may have been the first is
because Bill Graves was her chairman. And it makes
sense to me that it would have been someone that far
along who would have come out of curriculum and
instruction with Doreen. I just don't recall.
Okay, looking back on those five years, what were
the primary joys and frustrations of being a
department head? Well, the joy, of course, was
seeing new faculty and new programs flourish.
That was just, you just felt very, very good about
what was happening. The frustration was the
overwhelming number of students that were coming
into the undergraduate, master's, and doctoral
program. with limited resources as far as
providing the number of faculty members so you
could reduce their loads. People, by then, we may
have been able to reduce their load by only one
course. We were probably down to everybody
teaching four courses because we didn't have
enough faculty. to go around. And y'all were not
different from most of the other departments? Oh
no, no, that's true.
What about comparative salaries?
Were we reasonably competitive as far as you
recall? Not as I recall. I don't think we really
were competitive with your major universities.
We could never compete with an Ohio State or a UCLA
or a Southern Cal or Ohio State or Michigan. We
could not compete at that level. But certainly
anyone who couldn't, who wasn't at that level,
where they could step